This image tells the story of our two characters from the Shahnameh; Zal and Rudaba.
The two characters are the 1604 version of Rapunzel and her prince. However, unlike Rapunzel
and her Prince charming, their story does not begin with love; it begins with two
enemies. These two star-crossed lovers had never met in person until this image. Prior
to this scene, they had only heard of one another through word of mouth by
their parents. However, their parents did not wish for the two lovers to ever meet
because they did not want the two lovers to end up together. But Zal and
Rudaba had other plans for their future.
The two lovers first meet up in Rudabas tower after hours. The important thing to
look at in this image in the length of Rudabas hair. In this image, you
can see that her hair stretches from the top of her head all the way
to underneath her bottom. In order for Zal to get into Rudabas tower, she offered
her hair for Zal to climb to the top. However, being the gentleman that Zal
is he would rather use his rope to climb the tower than hurt Rudaba by
climbing up using her hair. So, in this image, the hair is of rather importance
because it shows readers a direct image of Rudabas hair and how it relates her
more to our modern day Rapunzel.
In the Shamanah it reads: “At dusk, they locked the gate and took the key
And then a damsel went to Zal and said:--/’All is prepared so come’”
For these two lovers to meet there was a journey that had to happen for
two young women. Rudabas damsels were sent to find Zal prior to the two meeting.
Rudaba was put into this tower so that she would never meet Zal because their
parents did not like each other. However, Rudaba and Zal were in love and needed
to meet each other. So Rudaba sends her two damsels to find Zal and invite
him back to the tower so they can have an evening together. In this image,
we can depict the two observers at the top of this image to be Rudabas
damsels. They are looking over the top and admire the fact that they brought these
two people together; just as children would admire their parents.
The two lovers spend the entire evening together and it may be implied that they
were involved in sexual intercourse for a majority of the evening. Another important observation to
make is the crown a top of Zal’s head. This is important because it shows
the royalty that Zal is and how these two lovers being together would mean a
future of royalty together as a couple. While their parents did not want these two
to end up together they did in fact eventually change their minds. The two characters
ended up happily ever after and even gave birth to the Great Conquerer, Rustam. If
it were not for Rudabas damsels these two lovers would have never met and brought
the future royalty for them and their son. This story was the introduction of Rapunzel
to this era and now we have many other versions derived from this.